# Scope Locals

## Summary

Enhance the Java API with scope locals, which are dynamically scoped,
effectively final, local variables. They allow a lightweight form of
thread inheritance, which is useful in systems with many threads and
tasks.

## History

The need for scope locals arose from Project Loom. Loom enables a way
of Java programming where threads are not a scarce resource to be
carefully managed by thread pools but are much more abundant, limited
only by memory. To allow us to create large numbers of threads &mdash;
potentially millions &mdash; we'll need to make all of the per-thread
structures scale well. This means that as much state as possible must
be shared between threads.

Thread-local variables, and in particular inheritable thread locals,
are a pain point in the design of Loom. When a new `Thread` instance
is created, its parent's set of inheritable thread-local variables is
cloned. This is necessary because a thread's set of thread locals is,
by design, mutable, so it cannot be shared. Every child thread ends up
carrying a local copy of its parent's entire set of thread locals,
whether the child needs them or not.

Ideally we'd like to have a zero-copy operation when creating threads,
so that inheriting context requires only the copying of a pointer from
the creating thread (the parent) into the new thread (the child). For
this to work, the inherited context must be effectively final.

(Note: in current Java it is possible on thread creation to opt out of
inheriting any thread-local variables, but that doesn't help if you
really need one of them.)

## Motivation

So you want to invoke a method `X` in a library that later calls back
into your code. In your callback you need some context, perhaps a
transaction ID or some `File` instances. However, `X` provides no way
to pass a reference through their code into your callback.  What are
you to do? Unfortunately, you're going to have to store the context
into what is, in effect, a global variable. A `ThreadLocal` instance
is a slight improvement on a global variable, in that you can have
multiple instances in a program, one per thread. However, this kind of
usage is still not re-entrant, so if `X` in turn calls back into your
method you'll be in trouble. And if the callback happens on a
different thread, this approach breaks down altogether.

We need a better way to do this.

## Description

The core idea of scope locals is to support something like a "special
variable" in Common Lisp. This is a dynamically scoped variable, which
acquires a value on entry to a lexical scope; when that scope
terminates, the previous value (or none) is restored. We also support
inheritance for scope locals, so that parallel constructs can set a
value in the parent before sub-tasks start.

One useful way to think of scope locals is as invisible, effectively
final, parameters that are passed through every method invocation.
These parameters will be accessible within the "dynamic scope" of a
scope local's binding operation (the set of methods invoked within the
binding scope, and any methods invoked transitively by them). They are
guaranteed to be re-entrant &mdash; when used correctly.

Scope locals can also provide us with some other nice-to-have
features, in particular:

* **Strong typing** Whenever a scope local is bound to a value, its type
  is checked. This means that a `ClassCastException` is delivered at
  the point an error was made rather than later. Also, there are
  usually more invocations of `get()` than there are binding
  operations, so it makes sense to do the check early.
* **Effective finality** The value bound to a scope local cannot change
  within a method. (It can be re-bound in a callee, of which more
  later.)
* **Well-defined extent** A scope local is bound to a value at the start
  of a scope and its previous value (or none) is always restored at
  the end.
* **Optimization opportunities** These properties allow us to generate
  good code. In many cases a scope-local `get()` is as fast as a local
  variable.

### Some examples

```
  // Declare scope locals x and y
  static final ScopeLocal<MyType> x = ScopeLocal.forType(MyType.class);
  static final ScopeLocal<MyType> y = ScopeLocal.forType(MyType.class);

  {
    ScopeLocal.where(x, expr1)
              .where(y, expr2)
              .run(() -> ... code that uses x.get() and y.get() ...);
  }
```

In this example, `run()` is said to "bind" `x` and `y` to the results
of evaluating `expr1` and `expr2` respectively. While the method
`run()` is executing, any calls to `x.get()` and `y.get()` return the
values that have been bound to them. The methods called from `run()`,
and any methods called by them, comprise the dynamic scope of `run()`.
Because scope locals are effectively final, there is no equivalent of
the `ThreadLocal.set()` method.

(Note 1: the declarations of scope locals `x` and `y` have an explicit
type parameter. This allows us to make a strong guarantee that if any
attempt is made to bind an object of the wrong type to a scope local
we'll immediately throw a ClassCastException.)

(Note 2: `x` and `y` have the usual Java access modifiers. Even though
a scope local is implicitly passed to every method in its dynamic
scope, a method will only be able to use `get()` if that scope local's
name is accessible to the method. So, sensitive security information
can be passed through a stack of non-privileged invocations.)

The following example uses a scope local to make credentials available
to callees.

```
    private static final ScopeLocal<Credentials> CREDENTIALS = ScopeLocal.forType(Credentials.class);

    Credentials creds = ...
    ScopeLocal.where(CREDENTIALS, creds).run(() -> {
        :
        Connection connection = connectDatabase();
        :
    });

    Connection connectDatabase() {
        if (CREDENTIALS.get().s != "MySecret") {
            throw new SecurityException("No dice, kid!");
        }
        return new Connection();
    }
```

### Shadowing

It is sometimes useful to be able to re-bind an already-bound scope
local. For example, a privileged method may need to connect to a
database with a less-privileged set of credentials, like so:

```
      Credentials creds = CREDENTIALS.get();
      creds = creds.withLowerTrust();
      ScopeLocal.where(CREDENTIALS, creds).run(() -> {
        :
        Connection connection = connectDatabase();
        :
      });
```

This "shadowing" only extends until the end of the dynamic
scope of the lambda above.
 
(Note: This code example assumes that `CREDENTIALS` is already bound
to a highly privileged set of credentials.)

### Inheritance

In our example above that uses a scope local to make credentials
available to callees, the callback is run on the same thread as the
caller. However, sometimes a method decomposes a task into several
parallel sub-tasks, but we still need to share some attributes with
them. For that we use scope-local inheritance.

Scope locals are either inheritable or non-inheritable. The
inheritability of a scope local is determined by its definition, like
so:

```
  static final ScopeLocal<MyType> x = ScopeLocal.inheritableForType(MyType.class);
```

Whenever `Thread` instances (virtual or not) are created, the set of
currently bound inheritable scope locals in the parent thread is
automatically inherited by each child thread:

```
    private static final ScopeLocal<Credentials> CREDENTIALS 
        = ScopeLocal.inheritableForType(Credentials.class);

    void multipleThreadExample() {
        Credentials creds = new Credentials("MySecret");
        ScopeLocal.where(CREDENTIALS, creds).run(() -> {
            for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
                virtualThreadExecutor.submit(() -> {
                    // ...
                    Connection connection = connectDatabase();
                    // ...
                });
            }
        });
    }
```

(Implementation note: The scope-local credentials in this example are
not copied into each child thread. Instead, a reference to an
immutable set of scope-local bindings is passed to the child.)

Inheritable scope locals are also inherited by operations in a
parallel stream:

```
    void parallelStreamExample() {
        Credentials creds = new Credentials("MySecret");
        ScopeLocal.where(CREDENTIALS, creds).run(() -> {
            persons.parallelStream().forEach((Person p) -> connectDatabase().append(p));
        });
    }
```

In addition, a `Snapshot()` operation that captures the current set
of inheritable scope locals is provided. This allows context
information to be shared with asynchronous computations.

For example, a version of `ExecutorService.submit(Callable c)` that
captures the current set of inheritable scope locals looks like this:

```
    public <V> Future<V> submitWithCurrentSnapshot(ExecutorService executor, Callable<V> aCallable) {
        var s = ScopeLocal.snapshot();
        return executor.submit(() -> ScopeLocal.callWithSnapshot(aCallable, s));
    }
```

In this example, the `snapshot()` operation captures the state of
bound scope locals so that they can be retrieved by any code in the
dynamic scope of the `submit()` method, whichever thread it's run
on. These bound values are available for use even if the parent thread
(the one that invoked `submitWithCurrentSnapshot()`) has terminated.

### Optimization

Scope locals have some strongly defined properties. These can allow us
to generate excellent code for `get()`.

* The bound value of a scope local is effectively final within a
  method. It may be re-bound in a callee, but we know that when the
  callee terminates the scope local's value will have been
  restored. For that reason, we can hoist the value of a scope local
  into a register at the start of a method. Repeated uses of a scope
  local can be as fast as using a local variable.

* We don't have to check the type of a scope local every time we
  invoke `get()` because we know that its type was checked earlier.
  
### API

There is more detail in the Javadoc for the API, at

http://people.redhat.com/~aph/loom-api/api/java.base/java/lang/ScopeLocal.html

## Alternatives

It is possible to emulate most of the features of scope locals with
`ThreadLocal`s, albeit at some cost in memory footprint, runtime
security, and performance. However, inheritable `ThreadLocal`s don't
really work with thread pools, and run the risk of leaking information
between unrelated tasks.

We have experimented with a modified version of `ThreadLocal` that
supports some of the characteristics of scope locals. However,
carrying the additional baggage of `ThreadLocal` results in an
implementation that is unduly burdensome, or an API that returns
`UnsupportedOperationException` for much core functionality, or
both. It is better, therefore, not to do that but to give scope locals
a separate identity from thread locals.
